.\" adl man page
.Dd July 18, 2026
.Dt ADL 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm adl
.Nd terminal download manager powered by aria2c
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm adl
.Op Ar command
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a terminal user interface for managing downloads via
.Xr aria2c 1 .
It runs entirely in the terminal: no GUI windows, menu bar icons, or browser.
.Pp
When started,
.Nm
launches a local
.Xr aria2c 1
RPC daemon for the duration of the session.
Downloads stop being managed when you quit
.Nm ;
the daemon is shut down gracefully and no background process remains.
.Pp
Supported download sources:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
HTTP and HTTPS URLs
.It
Magnet links
.It
Local
.Pa .torrent
files
.El
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm adl
Open the interactive main menu.
.It Cm adl Cm download
Skip the menu and go directly to the new download flow.
.It Cm adl Cm list
Show active, queued, and paused downloads with live progress bars.
.It Cm adl Cm settings
Open settings (default download folder, aria2c path).
.El
.Sh INTERACTIVE UI
.Ss Main menu
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy Up / Down
Navigate menu items
.It Sy Enter
Select item
.It Sy \&?
Show help
.It Sy Ctrl+c
Stop the daemon and quit
.El
.Ss New download
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy Enter
Confirm current step (URL, then destination)
.It Sy b
Browse folders when choosing destination
.It Sy Esc
Return to main menu
.El
.Pp
The destination defaults to
.Pa ~/Downloads .
Paste a URL, magnet link, or path to a
.Pa .torrent
file; the type is detected automatically.
.Ss Active downloads
The list contains active, queued, and paused downloads.
Paused downloads remain selectable so they can be resumed.
The details screen refreshes while it is open.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy j / k
Select download
.It Sy p
Pause selected download
.It Sy r
Resume selected download
.It Sy x
Cancel selected download
.It Sy Enter
Show download details
.It Sy Esc
Return to main menu
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Pa
.It Pa ~/.config/adl/config.yaml
User configuration file.
.El
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
download_dir: ~/Downloads
aria2_path: /opt/homebrew/bin/aria2c
rpc_port: 6800
.Ed
.Sh SECURITY
The aria2 RPC endpoint listens only on
.Pa 127.0.0.1
and uses a randomly generated secret for each session.
The secret is never written to disk.
.Pp
Control characters in download names, paths, statuses, and RPC errors are
neutralized before terminal rendering.
.Pp
On exit,
.Nm
first requests a graceful aria2 shutdown and uses a forced stop only if the
daemon does not exit before the shutdown timeout.
.Sh REQUIREMENTS
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Xr aria2c 1
(managed via Homebrew:
.Cm brew install aria2 )
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
Start the main menu:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
adl
.Ed
.Pp
Download a file directly:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
adl download
.Ed
.Pp
View active, queued, and paused downloads:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
adl list
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr aria2c 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Flontistacks
